---
title: "#78 - Micro-roundup, 11 June 2021"
date: 2021-06-11
layout: email
---
Hi, everyone!

Mainly taking the week off from the newsletter this week (for positive reasons - some family celebrations); things will return to normal next week.  But there were some things I wanted to share with you.

First, on the discussion from last week of planning for hybrid distributed/local work, we heard from long-time reader Adam DeConinck about what he's learned:

> I’m fortunate at the moment, because my current team was fully remote before the pandemic started. That said, here are a few thoughts based on some of my recent experience.
>
> Several of my past roles have already been “hybrid”, where either some employees were remote vs some not; or where employees were split across many offices in multiple time zones, which often led to similar communication challenges.
>
> The general philosophy that has seemed to work has been to split “location” by team. I.e., everyone on a team should either be remote, or should be co-located in the same office. This basically works to allow each team to find their rhythm.
>
>In the cases where teams have been split across different work “locations”, I’ve mostly seen the effective formation of “sub-teams”. E.g., while the [city X] and [city Y] offices may in theory both have members on the same team, they tend to split responsibilities to minimize overlap. Or, if there’s a core group in the office but a few remote folks, the remote team members form their own “team” where they mostly collaborate with each other.
>
> Based on this experience, I suspect organizations which are large enough to have a lot of teams will go through substantial re-orgs over the next year!
>
> Granted, this is a lot harder for orgs where there are fewer teams, or where they’re smaller or harder to split. In those cases, unless everyone can make it back into the office, I think the only thing that works is to go the “remote first” model: everyone works as if they were remote, joining video calls individually and putting most communication in text. And then in-office interaction is purely social.

This is really valuable; thanks, Adam!

On the other hand, I also heard from readers whose institutions are decidedly _not_ moving to hybrid or remote work but instead expect everyone back as soon as possible.  In a way that's a lot easier, but it certainly ties a hiring managers hands behind their backs in recruiting new hires, or retaining those who have come to like not having to commute every day.

---

If your team manages systems, you've probably heard about the really pretty bad privilege-escalating [polkit vulnerability](https://github.blog/2021-06-10-privilege-escalation-polkit-root-on-linux-with-bug/) that affects RHEL8, Fedora 21+, Debian testing, and Ubuntu 20.04  If you haven't, you'll want to update (a fix was released last week). The post is a really detailed overview of the bug and the proof of concept exploit.

---

Titus Brown generously shared the core of a [Chan Zuckerberg Initiative (CZI) Essential Open Source Software for Science](https://chanzuckerberg.com/eoss/) grant application in a blog post which you can read [here](http://ivory.idyll.org/blog/2021-sourmash-czi-application.html); the proposal aims to make their package sourmash more of a community code by moving towards more community engagement.

The post is interesting both if you're interested in CZI grants but also to see how a PI quite experienced in research software development thinks about building community engagement.

As a side note I'd love to see more research computing and data grant proposals being made public!

---

There's a call for papers due on Monday, 14 June, for a workshop on [Resilience in HPC Clusters, Clouds, and Grids](https://www.csm.ornl.gov/srt/conferences/Resilience/2021/); the workshop is held in conjunction with [Euro-Par 2021](https://2021.euro-par.org), to be held on-site in Lisbon.

---

And that's it for this mini-roundup.  Please keep feedback coming in, and welcome to all new readers.

Have a great weekend, and good luck in the coming week with your research computing team!

 Jonathan

---

