---
title: "#133 - 20 Aug 2022"
subtitle: "Building centers of exellence, not temp agencies; RCD staff career priorities; Challenges in core facilities; Making your work clear to yourself is the first step in making it visible to others"
date: 2022-08-20
layout: email
hero-img: https://buttondown.s3.amazonaws.com/images/a1969001-ef55-418d-b2eb-da9f20e2fd64.jpg
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD049 -->

# Research Computing Teams #133, 20 Aug 2022

Hi - I hope you’re enjoying your August!

One of the things I’d like to do now that I’m back from a couple of weeks off from the newsletter, is start being systematic about continually speaking with new research computing and data team managers, leads, PMs, *etc* - I’d like to talk to fifty or so and make sure I know the problems they have faced, are facing, and their successes.  I’ll write up the aggregated, anonymized results results, and circulate it to participants first.  I have five or six questions I’d like to ask them (and maybe you?) over a 20-30 minute zoom chat:

1. Tell me about how you started as a manager or lead, and the challenges you had at the beginning that you could have used help with.
2. Tell me about your team now - what they do, how they work, and who you report to.
3. What are some successes you’ve had with this team as a manager or lead?
4. What are some challenges you face right now, and what materials and resources are you using to help you navigate them?
5. What kinds of resources would help people in your position?
6. Who else (in particular or in general) would be good for me to talk to?

If that’s something you’d be up for, or you know someone else who’d be game, let me know - hit reply or email me at jonathan@researchcomputingteams.org!

----------

There's a reason I want to be more deliberate about speaking with a broader range of research computing and data managers and leads, and not just the ones I’m already working with.  Whenever I do, people raise important topics that we need to talk about more as a community.

One person I spoke to last week raised the fundamental issue of internal knowledge sharing.  It’s so easy, they explained, for individuals or subteams to learn things during the course of the work that would be useful more broadly, but not really have any incentive or mechanism to share it with others.  Or even to realize that it was important to do so.

This isn’t a small thing; it goes to the heart of what we do and how we operate as teams experts that support research.  I can’t emphasize enough how important it is to face this problem head on.  It matters particularly for teams where individuals provide services to research groups. (_e.g._ research facilitiators, ARC support staff, informaticians, datas scientists, software developers, ...)   If we as managers and leads don’t do anything about this, we end up with less a team than a bunch of individuals who have each learned cool things.

We want our team to be a centre of excellence, not a temp agency.

And our institution needs us to be a centre of excellence, too.

There’s nothing wrong, of course, with temp agencies.  They serve a real need, even in or around our line of work - heavens knows there’s no shortage of software development or bioinformatics agencies.  But if what our institution wanted was a supply of temporary staffing for individual efforts, HR could run it, or it could be contracted out.

Key to operating as a centre of excellence is a practice of continually growing and developing a shared pool of knowledge.  The skills, techniques, and knowledge learn as practitioners in research computing and data are widely transferrable, across disciplines and problem types.  And they combine to be more valuable than the sum of their parts; problems that aren’t tractable with technique A or approach B individually can suddenly yield to A + B.

Sharing knowledge across our organizations is crucial to their becoming centres of excellence.  It’s better for professional development growth of the individual team members, and it’s much better for the team as a whole.  Team members' knowledge grows  more valuable when they can see how it connects elsewhere.  It shows them how it could be combined with something someone else has just learned.  Team members discover areas they can collaborate with each other on, or who they can get help on with their effort.  As a side effect, it also mitigates the risk of institutional memory loss when a team member leaves.

Internal knowledge sharing can happen sort of organically and accidentally when there’s a very small number of team members.  This is especially true when they are co-located.   In larger groups or with people working from different locations, we have to actively nurture it, and put structures in place to encourage it.

There’s no one technique for promoting and enabling internal knowledge sharing.  Instead, there’s a toolbox of methods from which we can assemble bespoke practices that work for our teams.  Documentation can be great, particularly if we can take advantage of other process (like reports to the research groups). Internal chat and communications can be collected.  Journal-club style meetings can be held.  We can routinely give short talks to each other.   Each have their place, and some will be more natural fits for the culture of a team than others.

I do want to highlight some advantages of giving short (~10-15 minute) talks to each other, though.  Routinely giving short talks to a friendly audience (and getting feedback on them from peers and their manager) is a terrific professional development practice, especially for junior team members.  For more senior staff, talks this short aren’t too onerous to prepare.  They line up well with the culture of research institutions, so many staff are pretty comfortable with the idea of both giving and attending the talks, and they can be incorporated into other meetings, be stand-alone, or combined into short mini-conferences.

Whatever materials we generate for internal knowledge sharing may be very valuable for sharing externally.  After all, another key piece of becoming a centre of excellence is not just nurturing knowledge internally but disseminating it.  Short talks can often form the heart a talk at a local department’s colloquium or seminar series, or of a conference.  Internal write-ups can often be polished into posters or blog posts or conference abstracts. 10-15 minute talks also a really nice length for sharing and distributing externally.

What approaches have you seen work (and not work!) for internal knowledge sharing?  Hit reply or email me at jonathan@researchcomputingteams.org.

And with that, on to a short, getting-back-in-to-it, roundup!

## Managing Teams

[Understanding Factors that Influence Research Computing and Data Careers](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3491418.3530292) -  Chaudhry *et al*, PEARC22

I’m still working my way through PEARC22 papers - this one reports on a survey of 225 research computing and data staff.  It’s nice to see some data specifically about our community.

There is some interesting data here about what matters to RCD staff; for instance, the top three factors that respondents considered as being important ways their advancement should be recognized were:

- Being recognized for expertise and impact
- Increasing salary and benefits, and
- A greater influence on organizational strategy.

And the top four opportunities that mattered for considering a job move were:

- To make a more meaningful contribution
- For professional skills development
- To join an org that embraces innovation, and
- Higher salary.

The importance of being recognized and making a real impact come through pretty clearly, but I think it’s not something that comes up enough when we talk about the difficulties of hiring and retention.  We focus on the elephant in the room, which is salaries, but our ability to influence that is modest at best.  On the other hand we have an enormous ability to influence our team members feeling recognized, ability to see the impact of their work, feeling like they’re in a team that embraces innovation, and getting as much professional skills development as possible.

There’s also a nice chart in here about hiring managers, and the factors they take into account when hiring new team members.  Technical skills were still number one, but very shortly behind were “interpersonal, communication, and related skills”.  It’s good to see progress!

----------

[A survey of research quality in core facilities](https://elifesciences.org/articles/62212) - Kos-Braun, Gerlach, and Pitzer, eLife

As a community, we in RCD could learn a lot from our colleagues who run core facilities of all sorts - like us, they run equipment, provide expertise, do consulting for researchers, and have as an ultimate goal accelerating and amplifying research impact for their clients.  As groups with a longer history in some ways than our own, core facilities are a little more mature in thinking about ways to operate, sustainability, and more.

There’s also a *lot* more of them - this paper sent surveys out to 1,000 core facilities in Europe.  I found this paper when a reader shared a more recent [follow-up paper from this group](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9258915/).  Here they take a look at the practices of 253 (the number who responded) core facilities, and how those practices supported consistently high research quality.  I think some of the issues they see would be pretty familiar to us, even if the words used are a little different - for instance not having a good sense (or much control over) how high-quality the work is being done on their infrastructure, but worried about push-back if they tried to enforce good practices.  Whether that’s processing contaminated samples or running code in ways it wasn’t meant to be used, the basic tensions are the same.

They also surveyed challenges faced by core facility leaders - areas that needed to be improved.  High up on the list were the need to better train, advise, and communicate with users, challenges with finding, keeping, and having resources to hire enough qualified staff, keeping infrastructure up to date and maintained, quality control and good scientific practice - again, these probably sound fairly similar!  Management was another issue that was seen as a key (the second place!) area to improve, but, sadly, the importance of that issue ranked much lower (#2 from the bottom, in fact).  Obviously I think that’s a mistake - better management makes other problems more tractable.

When finding out about challenges, they dug deeper into what’s usually everyone’s knee-jerk response: “funding”, and I *really* appreciate that.  There’s no team or organization anywhere, in any sector, that doesn’t want more funding.  They could all accomplish more given more resources.  But too often we don’t dig any deeper.  Lack of a funding is a situation; it causes specific problems.  Below they have a nice flowchart of the issues the respondents saw that they attributed to a top-level cause of “funding”.

![Kos-Braun et al’s Figure 6, where they show a diagram of the problems identified by respondents due to lack of funding.  There’s equipment - it can’t be renewed or maintained; there’s staff issues caused, such as staff turnover or lack of knowledge, or insufficient number, or less effective management.  As a result of those staff issues, there can be lack of research trust caused by poor interaction with users, insufficiently trained users, a backlog of work, insufficient quality monitoring, and a lack of growth with a changing field because staff don’t have time to do R&D on top of running a service.](https://buttondown.s3.amazonaws.com/images/a1969001-ef55-418d-b2eb-da9f20e2fd64.jpg)

----------

## Managing Your Own Career

[A Simple Way to Introduce Yourself](https://hbr.org/2022/08/a-simple-way-to-introduce-yourself?SEQUOIACAPITAL-2022_08_09&sponsored=0&position=3&scheduled_corpus_item_id=859e8384-9962-49ab-aafc-b5728b1fbbc7) -  Andrea Wojnicki, HBR

For earlier-career managers who suddenly find themselves involved in meetings with a number of stakeholders, introducing ourselves can be a little daunting. Wojnicki offers a nice, simple, professional script to introduce yourself at meetings:

1. Hi, I’m [name], and a *short* present-tense statement about yourself with relevant context to the meeting
2. *Short* statement about the past with a detail or two that might be relevant
3. A *short* statement about the future connecting you to whatever the meeting is about.

*e.g.* me introducing myself on the calls I mention above might sound like:

“Hi, I’m Jonathan!  (1) I help research computing and data managers, new and experienced, with the challenges of these complex roles. (2) I’ve worked in a number of RCD teams myself in the past, and have worked with many RCD staff and managers of all levels and disciplines.  (3) I’m looking forward to hearing from you today about your experiences!”

----------

[How do I make sure my work is visible?](https://newsletters.feedbinusercontent.com/a36/a364822d85459e25abd332931708944d19425b78.html) - James Stanier

The things you have to do to being managing thoughtfully and deliberately - which requires setting some intentions and keeping track of what’s happening - are also the things you need to do make your work visible to your stakeholders and boss.  As Stanier says:

> What was even worse was that I was doing a bad job at making my work visible to myself.

If you yourself can’t quickly describe what you’ve been doing and accomplishing, how could your boss or stakeholders possibly know?

Stanier suggests a brag document, but anything that you’re doing to keep track of your initiatives as a manager, see how they’re succeeding or not, and decide next steps will be perfectly good starting point.

----------

## Research Software Development

The hugely revamped GitHub Projects [is now in GA](https://github.blog/2022-07-27-planning-next-to-your-code-github-projects-is-now-generally-available/) - this, along with Discussions, increasingly makes GitHub a possible all-in-one home not just for the developers on a product but for stakeholders and users as well.   Has anyone been using Projects in beta?  Or Discussions?  I’d love to hear your experiences.

----------

## Research Data Management and Analysis

One thing that RStudio has always had that Jupyter notebooks haven’t are clear off-ramps for getting initial exploratory code cleaned up, under tests and into version control, and packaged up.  So I’m really curious about fast.ai’s [nbdev](https://www.fast.ai/2022/07/28/nbdev-v2/).   Is this something anyone’s played with?

----------

## Research Computing Systems

[No observability without theory](https://blog.danslimmon.com/2019/05/03/no-observability-without-theory/) - Dan Slimmon

Slimmon’s point here is a great one and widely applicable, not just to large compute systems.  Empirical measurements are great - as an ex-scientist, I’m a big fan - but for all but the simplest systems, they have to be interpreted through theory.  This is why so many dashboarding projects fail, or why collecting metrics isn’t as useful as it sounds.  Without a clear (and shared!) mental model of the system under observation, it’s hard to have any common understanding of what the data means.

----------

Fascinating.  Apparently you can ssh-tunnel UNIX sockets (!!), and [Vanessa Sochat is using that to try to make running web apps on HPC clusters much easier](https://vsoch.github.io/2022/hpc-apps/).

----------

## Emerging Technologies and Practices

[Moving Networks Forward with Digital Twins](https://www.nextplatform.com/2022/08/10/moving-networks-forward-with-digital-twins/) - Jeffrey Burt, The Next Platform

Given I have basically no networking expertise, it may seem odd, but I’m unreasonably excited about the growing movement towards simulations of both wide-area and data-centre-scale networks.  Yes, or “Digital Twins”, if you must.

This article focuses mainly on wide area networks, but to me the exciting piece is the same approach for complex data centre networks, which frequently grow in an ad-hoc way, accreting new systems in ways that cause hard-to-predict problems.  Making it easier to simulate “what-if” scenarios ahead of time, or even have ongoing simulations informed by real network conditions to give a heads-up of what might be about to happen, seems like it would be extremely useful.

----------

## Random

This is a bit long, but a lot of random stuff has happened in the last three weeks!

A story of [using DALL-E 2 to generate a logo for a project](https://jacobmartins.com/posts/how-i-used-dalle2-to-generate-the-logo-for-octosql/) - this is a great way to generate ideas for a logo or other visual even if you have a human create the finished product.  For that idea generation phase, the free [Craiyon](https://www.craiyon.com) tool may be enough.

Create a virtual sqlite table that calls a JSON API for the return values with [sqlite-http](https://observablehq.com/@asg017/introducing-sqlite-http).

Learn SQL by [solving a murder mystery](https://github.com/NUKnightLab/sql-mysteries).

Janet Jackson’s “Rythm Nation” could crash laptops even by being played near them, [because a note in the song had a resonance with a particular model of 5400 rpm laptop hard drives](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/oldnewthing/20220816-00/?p=106994).

Easier ways of [crediting co-contributors on GitHub](https://hynek.me/til/easier-crediting-contributors-github/).

Since we last spoke, Gitlab [announced](https://www.theregister.com/2022/08/04/gitlab_data_retention_policy/) and then immediately [backtracked on](https://www.theregister.com/2022/08/05/gitlab_reverses_deletion_policy/) automatically deleting free-account repos if they hadn’t been touched in a year.  It’s great that they walked that back but… uh, who is making these decisions at GitLab?

A simple but comprehensive [engine simulator](https://github.com/ange-yaghi/engine-sim) that correctly generates engine sounds.

[Unblob](https://github.com/onekey-sec/unblob), an all-in-one file decompression/extraction tool that works with ar, cpio, dmg, rar, 7zip, tar, zip, zip, gzip, Z, lz4, xz, zstd, squashfs, and [many other formats](https://unblob.org/formats/).

In a development that will infuriate absolutely everyone, [wisp](https://www.draketo.de/software/wisp) is a lisp with hardly any parenthesis but instead uses Python-like meaningful whitespace.

[Sandboxing Make](https://justine.lol/make/) ([with landlock](https://landlock.io/#)), not (mainly) for security reasons but to ensure that all dependencies are tracked.

I initially thought of web assembly principally as a way to run desktop tools in the browser, but the battle-tested sandboxing of javascript environments gives a certain amount of isolation “for free”.  So people are talking about wasm as an alternative to containers, or [wasm for confidential computing](https://thenewstack.io/confidential-computing-with-webassembly/).

This just in - [lfortran](https://lfortran.org) (an emerging llvm fortran) has (still pretty alpha) [support for compiling to web assembly](https://dev.lfortran.org), which would unlock a *lot* of numerical code in the browser applications.

This is really cool - [docker-slim](https://github.com/docker-slim/docker-slim) will run and analyze your container, decide what doesn’t need to be there, and remove unneeded files and generate security profiles for those that remain.

Valgrind is 20 years old - [here’s a retrospective](https://nnethercote.github.io/2022/07/27/twenty-years-of-valgrind.html).

Friends don’t let friends [make these visualization mistakes](https://github.com/cxli233/FriendsDontLetFriends).

Linux micro VMs on M1/M2 Macs with [krunvm](https://slp.prose.sh/running-microvms-on-m1).

Frameworks for games and agent-based simulation are getting closer and closer - [Flecs](https://github.com/SanderMertens/flecs) is for games but could easily be interesting for single-node agent simulations.

21 pages(!!) of [C and C++ incompatibilities](https://docs.google.com/document/d/16B36r0HksR0LqQAGLA1syYCtZvYaVC0hEF2D00ZAd0o/view).

Meta is releasing [Docosaurus v2,](https://docusaurus.io/blog/2022/08/01/announcing-docusaurus-2.0) kind of sphinx for markdown but also allows directly embedding react components.

[Nice set of html + css tutorials](https://www.internetingishard.com) for those new to front end, taking modern techniques like flexbox and web fonts as a given.

[The case for PubPub](https://elephantinthelab.org/the-case-for-pubpub/) for online-only journals.

----------

## That’s it…

And that’s it for another week.  Let me know what you thought, or if you have anything you’d like to share about the newsletter or management.  Just [email me](mailto:jonathan@researchcomputingteams.org) or reply to this newsletter if you get it in your inbox.

Have a great weekend, and good luck in the coming week with your research computing team,

Jonathan

### About This Newsletter

Research computing - the intertwined streams of software development, systems, data management and analysis - is much more than technology.  It’s teams, it’s communities, it’s product management - it’s people.  It’s also one of the most important ways we can be supporting science, scholarship, and R&D today.

So research computing teams are too important to research to be managed poorly.  But no one teaches us how to be effective managers and leaders in academia.  We have an advantage, though - working in research collaborations have taught us the advanced management skills, but not the basics.

This newsletter focusses on providing new and experienced research computing and data managers the tools they need to be good managers without the stress, and to help their teams achieve great results and grow their careers.

----------

## Jobs Leading Research Computing Teams

This week’s new-listing highlights are below; the full listing of 225 jobs is, as ever, available on [the job board](https://www.researchcomputingteams.org/jobs/).

**[SIMULIA R&D Software Development Manager - CFD Simulation](https://www.3ds.com/careers/jobs/simulia-r-d-software-development-manager-cfd-simulation-526657)** - Dassault Systems, Waltham MA USA <br/>
As the leader of the PowerFLOW simulator development team, you will be developing CFD technology that is revolutionizing the way engineers employ fluids simulation in product design. The team is responsible for extending PowerFLOW to enable new application areas, implementing new physics models and algorithms, adding a variety of new features, and enhancing the performance and scalability of the simulator. The simulator is routinely used in production on parallel systems with hundreds and sometimes thousands of processors, and as such, parallelism is a constant theme as new features are added. There is also a GPU version of the simulator under development. This is a highly visible, key position in SIMULIA's software development organization offering the opportunity for significant leadership and impact.

**[Manager of Clinical Research Programming, Center for Research Informatics](https://uchicago.wd5.myworkdayjobs.com/en-US/External/job/Chicago-IL/Manager-of-Clinical-Research-Programming_JR16242)** - University of Chicago, Chicago IL USA <br/>
The Center for Research Informatics (CRI) is an organization within the Biological Sciences Division (BSD) that provides informatics resources and services to BSD faculty. As a Manager of Clinical Research Programming in the CRI, you will lead, manage, and grow a team of application developers and software engineers to deliver services in support of the research mission. As a key member of the team, your work will support scientists by delivering scalable and secure clinical research data management and automation services.

**[Manager, Software Engineering, Scientific Systems](https://jobs-axleinfo.icims.com/jobs/3166/manager%2c-software-engineering/job)** - Axle Informatics, Rockville MD USA <br/>
Be a part of building innovative solutions with emerging technologies to improve basic scientific research to create new therapies and cures.  Axle Informatics is a bioinformatics and information technology company that offers innovative software, informatics, and enterprise solutions to research centers and healthcare organizations around the globe. As a Software Engineering Manager, Scientific Systems with strong technical leadership and scientific systems experience, you have an opportunity to lead multiple engineering teams, work on the latest technologies and build cutting-edge scientific software solutions. We need a collaborative leader who can think big, deliver on those  challenges, and along the way, change the world.

**[Manager, Computational Biology, Exosome Diagnostics](https://www.paycomonline.net/v4/ats/web.php/jobs/ViewJobDetails?job=72292&clientkey=25CC88284DDA7F561FE3B7261449A7AD)** - Biotechne, Waltham MA USA <br/>
Exosome Diagnostics, a Bio-Techne brand (NASDAQ: TECH), is a global molecular diagnostics product and solutions company that specializes in harnessing the power of exosomes to revolutionize disease management and patient care through non-invasive liquid biopsies.  As a Manager, Computational Biology, you will lead a team of other computational scientists to advance our discovery platform and develop new capabilities to identify new biomarker and diagnostic signatures. Building upon your deep expertise in the application and development of bioinformatics pipelines and machine learning algorithms to distill insights from broad omics data sets, you will work collaboratively and cross-functionally with other R&D scientists to bring new and innovative diagnostic products and services to market.

**[Technical Leader - Machine Learning](https://jobs.csiro.au/job/Brisbane%2C-QLD-Technical-Leader-Machine-Learning/924252700/)** - CSIRO, Various AU <br/>
IMT’s Scientific Computing provides CSIRO scientists access to dedicated end-to-end high-performance storage, computing, and network infrastructure, as well as advanced research services. The Scientific Computing teams support a range of systems from corporate IT systems through to world-class High-Performance data storage and processing.  In addition, the Scientific Computing Services teams deliver expertise in data analytics and visualisation, research software engineering, modelling and dataflows, and technical solutions. The capability is highly customer focussed and operates in close partnership with all areas of CSIRO research. As a Technical Leader - Machine Learning, you will help define and advance our Machine Learning capabilities’ strategic direction in alignment with organisational wide initiatives such as Managed Data Ecosystem (MDE), Reinvent Science, CSIRO Missions, Future Science Platforms (FSPs) and IMT’s strategic plans.

**[Cellular Genetics Informatics Team Leader](https://jobs.sanger.ac.uk/vacancy/cellular-genetics-informatics-team-leader-496868.html)** - Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton UK <br/>
The Cellular Genetics Programme is seeking an ambitious, experienced, and highly motivated individual to lead the Cellular Genetics Informatics team. The team provides comprehensive support to our Faculty research teams, including but not limited to; creating and scaling bioinformatics analysis pipelines and software, performing bioinformatics analysis on datasets in collaboration with Faculty teams and contributing to publications accordingly, leading Programme engagement with core Informatics and Digital Solutions (IDS) teams, supporting sample tracking software, and managing data generated by the research teams.

**[Quantum Applications Team Lead](https://www.careersportal.co.uk/UKRI-careers/jobs/quantum-applications-team-lead-2235)** - National Quantum Computing Centre, Oxford UK <br/>
You will lead the work of the Quantum Applications Team within the Innovation function. The team focuses on developing quantum applications to provide solutions in response to real use cases. You will act as a technical authority on quantum application development, working collaboratively with internal and external stakeholders, to develop the necessary workflows, and deliver R&D activities, in order to test use cases on real quantum processors and emulators. Your work will support delivery of the NQCC's goals to scale quantum computing capabilities in support of our technology roadmap, and build a quantum-ready UK economy.

**[Research Computing Program Manager, Foundations for Research Computing](https://opportunities.columbia.edu/en-us/job/527678/research-computing-program-manager)** - Columbia University, New York NY USA <br/>
The Program Manager will oversee a training program for graduate students and postdocs in research computing while continuing to identify training needs for that community, and adapting and developing the program to meet those changing needs. The Program Manager will direct and grow the community of trained Software Carpentry instructors to plan and facilitate workshops, boot camps, and additional training opportunities at the novice and intermediate levels. The Program Manager will maintain an existing community-facing Python User Group and have the opportunity to develop other community-facing programming. Partnering with colleagues in the Libraries, the Program Manager will additionally develop and maintain continuous relationships and communications channels with academic departments across the University in order to survey administrators, faculty, and students about their ever-evolving needs for computational literacy, and methods for meeting these expressed needs. The Program Manager serves as Columbia’s representative on the membership council of The Carpentries, an organizational partner in training researchers in computational skills.

**[Sr. Manager of Information Resources, Research Informatics](https://utsw.taleo.net/careersection/2/jobdetail.ftl?job=247112)** - UTSouthwestern Medical Center, Dallas TX USA <br/>
Responsible for the day-to-day operations, support and management of the Clinical Research Informatics applications critical to research administration operations, the EDC system (REDCap), the Research Feasibility applications (i2b2, ACT, PCORI), UTSW Clinical Data Exchange management System (ClinDEN), the Specimen management system (OpenSpecimen), the Cancer Genomic System (cBioPortal), and the Expertise profiling and research networking system (PURE Influuent). Define project scope, goals and deliverables that support business goals in collaboration with senior management and stakeholders. Management of business analysts and development teams that supports these applications. Manage tasks and projects across the various applications, technical resources and stakeholders; in addition to prioritizing incoming projects.

**[Head of Research Software Engineering](https://www.jobs.ac.uk/job/CSK006/head-of-research-software-engineering-grade-9)** - University of Liverpool, Liverpool UK <br/>
The University of Liverpool’s IT Services Department is recruiting an experienced Head of Research IT Platforms. We are embarking on an ambitious expansion of our Research IT capabilities and are looking to significantly grow the portfolio of services provided by the existing Research IT team, from enhanced technical infrastructure, research software engineering support and more extensive researcher engagement. Key to this ambition is the appointment of the newly formed role, the Head of Research Platforms. Working with the Associate Director – Research IT, this role will be instrumental in designing and implementing the Research Software Engineering strategy going forward, to ensure we provide an effective and easy to use research applications and software development to allow our academic colleagues to focus on the research

**[Research - Team Lead, UHN Digital](https://www.recruitingsite.com/csbsites/uhncareers/JobDescription.asp?SiteID=10031&JobNumber=904101)** - University Health Network, Toronto ON CA <br/>
The Team Lead role for Research will be a key contact for all of UHN users on information technology programs, systems and devices, responding to escalated issues in a professional and timely manner. The Technical Support team will take ownership of issues brought to them and proactively look to improve our systems and streamline service delivery. The ideal candidate will make mentoring and leading the Research support team their primary goal and aim to build the trust of our clinical, research, education and administration staff.

**[Principal Storage Engineer, Faculty of Arts and Sciences Research Computing](https://sjobs.brassring.com/TGnewUI/Search/home/HomeWithPreLoad?PageType=JobDetails&partnerid=25240&siteid=5341&Areq=59494BR#jobDetails=1966607_5341)** - Harvard University, Boston MA USA <br/>
Lead the design, implementation, and lifecycle management of current and future storage deployments (currently Lustre, ceph, and DellEMC Isilon systems). Evaluate current state-of-the-art developments in storage technology. Recommend appropriate products to support local needs. Develop policy and procedures for storage installations, continued maintenance, storage lifecycles, monitoring, and usage. Work with vendors, other related groups on campus, and national/international groups to identify storage trends and new technologies. Discuss and coordinate with groups when appropriate. Perform project management duties for storage decisions, installations, configurations, and decommissions.

**[Project Manager, Shared Research Infrastructure](https://mq.wd3.myworkdayjobs.com/en-US/CareersatMQ/details/Project-Manager--Shared-Research-Infrastructure_R000008503?source=Linkedin)** - Macquarie University, North Ryde AU <br/>
Macquarie University aims to integrate research infrastructure to, support excellence in research and collaboration. The Project Manager (Shared Research Infrastructure) will lead the development and implementation of a whole-of-University approach to maximising the benefits of shared (physical and digital) research infrastructure, in alignment with the University’s Research Strategy and Operating Plan. Through this work, we will ensure that: our research equipment and technical expertise are world-class; our co-ordinated network, including governance and management, provide outstanding support for our research community, enabling world-leading impactful research; and, training and access for the next generation of researchers to state-of-the-art technologies secures a solid foundation for research excellence in Macquarie University.

**[Senior Lead Quantum Computing Engineer](https://wd5.myworkdaysite.com/recruiting/pru/Careers/job/Newark-NJ-USA/Senior-Lead-Quantum-Computing-Engineer_R-109716-1?src=Eightfold)** - Prudential, Newark NJ USA <br/>
Reporting to Global Technology’s Chief Architect, the Quantum Computing Senior Lead Software Engineer will evaluate, pilot, and evolve its approach to harnessing emerging Quantum Computing techniques, across its asset management and insurance capabilities. Responsibilities range from development of low-level Proof-of-concepts on existing quantum computing platforms under development in industry and academia, to more complex, cloud-based capabilities involving hybrid quantum-classical algorithms, run on quantum simulators and/or cloud platforms (e.g. AWS Braket).  The ideal candidate is a full-stack developer with a DevOps mindset, with proficiency in both front-end and back-end development and has some background or experience in Quantum Computing.

**[Research Software Project Manager, King's Digital Lab](https://jobs.kcl.ac.uk/gb/en/job/052325/Research-Software-Project-Manager)** - Kings College London, London UK <br/>
The King’s Digital Lab (KDL - https://kdl.kcl.ac.uk) is a Research Software Engineering (RSE) team embedded within King’s College London’s Faculty of Arts and Humanities. Our software development approach allows researchers from a variety of disciplines to achieve their goals by designing and implementing systems, infrastructure, tools, and processes needed to produce a heterogeneous range of high quality digital scholarly outputs, datasets and processes. As a Research Software Engineering laboratory in the digital humanities, cultural heritage and social science research, KDL is deeply committed to co-research and is constantly evolving as new tools and methods appear. We have an open, collaborative culture, both within the Lab and with our research partners.    The Research Software (RS) Project Manager will play a critical role in liaising between the Solution Development Team (SDT) and project partners, as well as working closely with the Director and lab manager to ensure the efficient running of the Lab

**[Director, Research Computing](https://tre.tbe.taleo.net/tre01/ats/careers/v2/viewRequisition?org=SIMOFRAS&cws=37&rid=4296)** - Simon Fraser University, Burnaby BC CA <br/>
The Director, Research Computing is responsible for providing strategic, operational, and administrative leadership to the delivery of researcher focused services to meet the diverse needs of the university community. The Director oversees a large portfolio including large research computing facilities including storage facilities, country-wide collaborations and services, high-performance network design, and operations. The director is responsible for defining and implementing strategies focused on delivering researcher-focused services, while leading a team dedicated to providing outstanding researcher support across SFU and in partnership with other IT and Academic units. As a key member of the IT Services (ITS) senior leadership team, the role participates and contributes to the development of the ITS strategic plan and leads continuous improvement initiatives within the Research Computing portfolio. The Director also reports, in a dotted line relationship, to the Associate Vice-President Research and International to assure close alignment with the University research priorities.

**[Project Manager - Data Science Research](https://careersen-trilliumhealthpartners.icims.com/jobs/28471/job?iis=Job+Board&iisn=Indeed&indeed-apply-token=73a2d2b2a8d6d5c0a62696875eaebd669103652d3f0c2cd5445d3e66b1592b0f&mobile=false&width=775&height=500&bga=true&needsRedirect=false&jan1offset=-300&jun1offset=-240)** - Trillium Health Partners, Mississauga ON CA <br/>
Reporting to the Manager, Data, Insights & Advanced Analytics, the Project Manager will lead the development and implementation of funded research projects using the Institute for Better Health’s cloud data platform, enabling and enriching research and business analytics at Trillium Health Partners (THP). This role will lead business development with private and public research funders, and manage scoping, contracting, data extraction and analysis to support this innovative private-public program. This role will require collaboration with a variety of internal and external stakeholders, including senior management, research staff, information services, business intelligence, and frontline clinicians.

**[HPC Systems Programme Manager, EPCC](https://www.jobs.ac.uk/job/CSF935/hpc-systems-programme-manager)** - University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh UK <br/>
At EPCC, the High-Performance Computing (HPC) centre at the University of Edinburgh, we are growing our portfolio of High Performance Computing and Data Science Services and require a Programme Manager to work within the HPC Systems team to lead teams of highly skilled technical specialists towards project and programme delivery.

**[Program Manager, Health Informatics and Data Science](https://www.timeshighereducation.com/unijobs/listing/304257/program-manager-health-informatics-and-data-science/)** - University of Melbourne, Melbourne AU <br/>
The Centre for Digital Transformation of Health is a cross-disciplinary centre that sits in the Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and Health Sciences, and the School of Computing and Information Systems. The Program Manager (Health Informatics and Data Science) will be a key member of the Centre for Digital Transformation of Health’s (DT4H) team, which aims to make better use of routinely collected clinical data for research and inform clinical practice improvement. Guided by a Committee co-convened by the Melbourne Academic Centre for Health (MACH) and DT4H, with representation from University-affiliated hospitals and the Department of General Practice’s primary care research network, this program of work aims to coordinate building capacity in the ecosystem of people, projects and systems that is required if the volume of data collected during routine healthcare is to be used to benefit patients.

**[Program Leader – High Performance Computing (BBBH91336)](https://www.aplitrak.com/?adid=QXBhcm5hLk1hbGlrLjkyMjMyLjE1NTBAdGFsZW50aW50ZXJuYXRpb25hbGF1LmFwbGl0cmFrLmNvbQ)** - Department of Defense, Adelaide or Melbourne or Canberra AU <br/>
The Department of Science and Technology Group brings together interdisciplinary expertise from across Australia and around the world to address Defence and national security challenges. There role is to work closely with the Australian science, technology and innovation eco- system to deliver scientific advice and solutions that provide capability enhancement for Defence and the national security community.  As the Program Leader – High Performance Computing, you will provide strategic leadership in application and development of computational and data intensive capability. Work closely with various areas within DST Group’s Digital Science and Scientific Computing function. You will engage with researchers, senior leaders, external research partners and national and international organisations with regard to computational and data intensive capabilities.

**[Senior Software Manager, Nuclear Nonproliferation](https://jobs.ornl.gov/job/Oak-Ridge-Sr_-Software-Manager-TN-37830/891807600/)** - Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge TN USA <br/>
Within the NND, the Detonation Forensics and Response (DFR) group focuses on nuclear detonation fallout prediction for support of improved capabilities in detonation characterization and forensics and provides enhanced tools to support incident response and consequence management. The DFR group seeks applications for a Sr. Software Manager who will: oversee the group’s software development and deployment activities, maintain a continuous integration / continuous deployment (CI/CD) environment on Windows, Mac, and Linux machines, prepare software releases, develop user manuals and training materials, and advise and mentor both software development and research staff.

**[Senior Manager - High Performance Computing Facility](https://talent.stjude.org/careers/jobs/10331?lang=en-us&mode=job&iis=Job+Board&iisn=Indeed-Organic&_ccid=1584200780937s53b19v6z&ittk=O854OXAOFI)** - St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis TN USA <br/>
The Senior Manager of the High-Performance Computing Facility (HPCF) has responsibility for scientific computing and digital innovation under the leadership of Vice President of Research Information Services in support of St. Jude research. This high-profile position serves as an important advisor to the Vice President of Research Information Services team and will contribute to the formation and execution of the St. Jude scientific computing technology vision and strategy. The Senior Manager of HPCF position provides the opportunity to be at the intersection of computer science, basic science and translational research, and systems and computational engineering to ensure the St. Jude computational architecture keeps up with the rate of innovation in the nationally recognized research hospital.

**[Manager, Infrastructure and Support Services](https://apply.perimeterinstitute.ca/prog/2022_manager_ISS/)** - Perimeter Institute, Waterloo ON CA <br/>
As the Manager, Infrastructure and Support Services you are responsible for the planning, operation, and management of the organization’s infrastructure and support services. This includes the research, procurement, and implementation of infrastructure, end-user devices, and services as well as the management of the organization's help desk and infrastructure teams. Your responsibilities encompass the architecture, design, management, and security of Perimeter’s networking, compute, and storage technologies and services which span its on-premises, co-location, and IaaS/PaaS/SaaS environments.

**[Software Development Manager, High Performance Computing, EFA](https://www.amazon.jobs/en/jobs/2184570/software-development-manager-high-performance-computing Software Development Manager, High Performance Computing)** - AWS, London UK <br/>
The AWS HPC EFA team is building the software stack that enables low-latency, high-bandwidth networking for HPC and ML workloads. This is an opportunity to build systems that enable HPC workloads to scale, interacting with numerous AWS teams and Open Source Communities. As a manager in the AWS HPC EFA team, you'll partner with research and business teams to build new capabilities that surprise and delight our customers. You'll be surrounded by people who are passionate, and believe that truly innovative service is critical to customer success. If you're looking to solve challenging problems and create great products for customers, then this is the right role for you!

**[Project Manager, Applied AI Projects](https://vectorinstitute.bamboohr.com/jobs/view.php?id=208)** - Vector Institute, Toronto ON CA <br/>
Reporting to the Director Applied AI Projects, Industry Innovation, the Project Manager will act as an interface between external industry sponsors and internal Vector research activities and ensure the coordination and delivery of Vector industry projects that meet the direct needs of industry sponsors ranging from large enterprises to small startups.  This role is responsible for the ideation and articulation of new projects, as well as all project management functions including monitoring and reporting on project traction and progress, coordinating the development discussion, and approval of corrective action and/or contingency plans.

**[Bioinformatics Development Manager](https://www.linkedin.com/jobs/view/bioinformatics-development-manager-at-azenta-life-sciences-3204009830/)** - Azenta Life Sciences, Remote USA <br/>
We are seeking an experienced, versatile Bioinformatics Development Manager to oversee development initiatives supporting our Next Generation Sequencing and expansion into multi-omics. This position will be responsible for leading and expanding our team of bioinformatics developers and offerings to drive new/improve services and architect scalable solutions to support our rapidly growing global business. If you are a self-starter, who has a passion for development in a fun, yet results-driven, collaborative environment - then you’re just what we are looking for!

**[HPC Team Lead, Formula 1](https://berkeleysquareit.com/job/hpc-team-lead/)** - Berkeley Square IT (recruiter), Northamptonshire UK <br/>
An exciting new opportunity for an experienced High Performance Computing (HPC) professional to join a high profile employer in the F1 industry. This role offers a generous salary, bonus and benefits package alongside a varied and exciting role.  This employer are a globally recognised brand in the Formula One / F1 industry. With increasing calls upon their supercomputing platforms and for an ever increasing range of purposes they are going through a redevelopment of the HPC infrastructure. This role will involve leading a small team of engineers who are contributing to the support of the existing platform as well as projects focused on its evolution.

**[Senior Manager, Biomedical Data Science Initiative](https://jobrxiv.org/job/university-of-utah-27778-senior-manager-biomedical-data-science-initiative/)** - University of Utah, Salt Lake City UT USA <br/>
The Senior Vice President for Health Sciences Research Unit (SVPHS Research Unit) at University of Utah Health seeks a Senior Manager (Research Development Associate III) to develop, organize, and oversee all administrative aspects of a new health sciences strategic research initiative: the Data Exploration and Learning for Precision Health Intelligence (DELPHI) Data Science Initiative. The goal of the DELPHI Initiative is to catalyze interdisciplinary data-science driven research to drive innovation in health and medicine.

**[Quantum Information Science Program Manager](https://www.linkedin.com/jobs/view/quantum-information-science-program-manager-at-berkeley-lab-3194936311/)** - Berkeley Lab, Berkeley CA USA <br/>
Berkeley Lab (LBNL) is the home of world-class team science in service to the nation, and leads the Quantum Systems Accelerator (QSA), a 15-institution quantum information science (QIS) research center. Berkeley Lab’s Applied Math and Computational Research Division has an opening for a Quantum Information Science (QIS) Program Manager to support the QSA in achieving strategic program goals, maintaining relationships with high-level stakeholders in the academic, national laboratory, and industrial landscape, and managing the day-to-day operational aspects of scientific research and related quantum ecosystem activities.

**[Project Manager- Genomics Platform, Informatics](https://broadinstitute.wd1.myworkdayjobs.com/broad_institute/job/Cambridge-MA/Project-Manager--Genomics-Platform--Informatics_1828?sid=42)** - Broad Institute, Cambridge MA USA <br/>
The Broad Institute’s Genomics Platform seeks to hire a project manager. This individual will manage a set of projects that fall within GP’s project management team with a focus on new infrastructure & informatics. The candidate’s main responsibilities  are three-fold (i) work closely with the business analysis and technical teams in order to deliver projects within time and scope, (ii) enabling and facilitating projects through operational and administrative processes, and (iii) act as the liaison between the genomic data production PM and the technical teams to communicate updates, timelines, and blockers

**[Head of Bioinformatics Services & Development](https://activemotif.isolvedhire.com/jobs/660617-85090.html)** - Active Motif, Carlsbad CA USA <br/>
Active Motif is the industry leader in developing and delivering innovative tools to enable epigenetics and gene regulation research. Oversees the processing of customer data, maintenance and improvement of existing analysis pipelines, and transfer of new analysis pipelines to production.

**[Program Manager, Research Informatics](https://www.uclahealthcareers.org/job/16359675/program-manager-research-informatics-los-angeles-ca/)** - UCLA Health, Los Angeles CA USA <br/>
The Program Manager is responsible for the planning and implementing major projects/programs that have significant organizational impact or are linked to major goals defined in the organizational strategy. In addition, they develop the project management framework and provides supervision, guidance and day-to-day direction to a team of project managers and business analyst ensuring that projects are well managed and adhere to appropriate standards and governance.

In this role, you will also act as business partner between the IT groups, lines of business and other stakeholders working with to develop, prioritize, and execute the IT portfolio.

**[Software Engineering Lead](https://j.brt.mv/PortalViewRequirement.do?reqGK=27669504)** - Elligo Health Research, Remote or Austin TX USA <br/>
The Software Engineering Lead role is responsible for technical leadership for a large scrum team and full stack development on the Root Health patient engagement platform. The lead is also a key individual contributor on the team. The Root Health platform leverages an AI Virtual Assistant which uses automation to streamline and accelerate clinical research. This fast-moving team works with conversational AI, a microservices architecture, and quick release cycles to build an industry-leading product. This role is a core member of our Agile software development team building technical solutions for requirements spanning front-end and back-end components. We have an aggressive roadmap for the platform as we seek to expand Elligo’s patient registry.

**[Software Engineering Manager](https://jobs.lever.co/deep6/3f5f3838-acf3-4882-99f5-cd9608d2d7a3)** - Deep 6 AI, Remote USA <br/>
We are transforming and accelerating clinical trials, to help get life-saving treatments to patients faster and accelerate innovation in healthcare. To that end, we build a cutting-edge software suite that connects all clinical research stakeholders, from research teams to treating physicians, patients, and study sponsors on a real-time, real-world data SaaS platform, powered by AI.  We are looking for a Software Engineering Manager to oversee the technical implementation of our software with our health system customers. Working closely with project managers, solutions engineers, and data engineers, the Director will evaluate and define the best processes for extracting and ingesting healthcare data, leveraging industry standards where possible to streamline our implementation efforts

**[Software Engineering Manager](https://jobs.lever.co/kairosaerospace/a8521451-d82c-443c-9deb-2d0d7d83d5fe)** - Kairos Aerospace, Remote USA <br/>
At Kairos Aerospace, we combine innovative aerospace systems with advanced data science. Unlike traditional aerospace companies, we sell information, not hardware - we operate our sensors cost-effectively at continental scale to produce novel data streams about pressing global problems. First on our list: spotting hard-to-monitor emissions of methane, a potent greenhouse gas that accelerates climate change.  Our Software Engineering team is comprised of twelve people. In addition to our VP of Software Engineering and our CTO, we have ten software engineers. At the moment, all of the engineers report to our VP, so we are seeking a couple of experienced Software Engineering managers who can help build, support, and lead our teams as we go through rapid scaling. We are looking for managers who are able to shift between people leadership and hands-on technical work. We seek professionals who understand the importance of psychological safety. We want our leaders to act as coaches, balancing structure with flexibility so that developers are given clear direction and the resources they need to achieve their goals alongside lots of autonomy.