---
layout: post
date: 2021-08-06
original_url: https://www.researchcomputingteams.org/newsletter_issues/0086
tags: ['hiring', 'interviewing_and_evaluating']
priority: 1
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD041 -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD049 -->

[My Lessons from Interviewing 400+ Engineers Over Three Startups](https://review.firstround.com/my-lessons-from-interviewing-400-engineers-over-three-startups) - Marco Rogers, First Round Review

Here we have a collection of interlocking articles and resources on interviewing for technology jobs.

The parallels between startups and research computing aren't made explicit as often as they should be.  There’s a lot of need for tolerating uncertainty - in both cases, people are defining the problem while working on a solution.  And with a small team but many changing things to do, everyone has to be adaptable enough to be able to do a little bit of a lot.

In the first article, Rogers talks about his experience hiring 80 developers and ops staff for three startups - and his concern that many organizations don’t view interviewing and hiring as the crucial activities that they are.

Rogers dismisses interviewing purely for technical knowledge and skills - in a startup, as in research computing, you don’t actually know at any given time exactly what skills and technologies you’ll need in the coming years, and technology skills are only one piece of the puzzle anyway.   He emphasizes having clear rubrics for hiring that also include questions around ego, adaptability, technical communication skills, and cross-functional collaboration skills.

For running the interviews, he recommends having two interviewers at a time - it allows interviewers to split time between engaging and observing, it helps spot biases, and it helps train new interviewers.  He also recommends having the entire team interview, partly to emphasize the importance of interviewing and to communicate widely what is needed for a successful new hire.  He also recommends doing more interviews, bringing in ten for each position.  Below is an example of how an on-site interview schedule would work for a front-end developer.

Post interview, he recommends having a huddle, getting an initial yes/no (Lever uses strong hire/hire/no hire/strong no hire) and then dig into they why's to surface and amplify meaningful signal.  Before the huddle, it should be clear who is making the decision, and how, so that everyone knows how their input will be used.