---
layout: post
date: 2022-04-23
original_url: https://www.researchcomputingteams.org/newsletter_issues/0119
tags: ['managing_your_career']
priority: 3
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD041 -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD049 -->

[Reverse Interviewing Your Future Manager and Team](https://blog.pragmaticengineer.com/reverse-interviewing/) - Gergely Orosz

There’s no perfect jobs, but there are bad jobs, and there are overall good jobs which nonetheless are a very bad match to what you personally prefer and want to be doing every day.

Once you get an offer you can start reverse-interviewing in earnest.  I don’t mean the “what does success look like in this role” kind of question you ask in the last 5 minutes of a 60 minute interview slot, I mean really digging deep to figure out what working in the job would actually be like.  Especially if you have a couple of offers (and todays environment is **very conducive** to getting multiple offers), the information uncovered here can help guide you to a choice you’ll be happy with for a few years.

Besides any specific questions that you have after thinking about the role and the organization - *anything* which seems odd or surprising to you - Orosz and some of his colleagues contribute some pretty good general purpose questions for the hiring manager but also senior peers you’d be working with:

- What are you most excited about for the next six months?
- What did your typical workweek look like for the past month?
- How would you describe the team dynamics
- What advice would you give the new hire to be successful?
- Hsa anyone left the team?  What was the reason?
- Can you show a non-trivial code review [LJD - or migration or update or…]?
- What separates a good day from a bad day for you? (and then dig into how often the bad days occur and what causes them)
- What do you like and dislike about the manager?
- Who did they last promote on the team, and why?
- How supportive are they as a manager?

Even if the answers only solidify your decision to join the new company, they will be useful for giving you a head start, knowing better what to expect in your first months.