---
layout: post
title: A C++ Migration Story adopting Modules
date: 2020-05-01
<<<<<<< HEAD
<<<<<<< HEAD
issue_number: 22
=======
>>>>>>> 0a34fe0... First go at item pages
=======
issue_number: 22
>>>>>>> c1d069a... First pass at category pages
original_url: https://www.researchcomputingteams.org/newsletter_issues/0022
tags: ['software_development', 'migration', 'case_study']
priority: 3
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD041 -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD049 -->

[Migrating large codebases to C++ Modules](https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.05092) - Takahashi, Shadura, & Vassilev <br/>
[C++ Modules in ROOT and Beyond](https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.06507) - Vassilev,  Lange, Muzzafar, Rodozov, Shadura, & Penev

C++20 is finally coming.   There are five major new features - Contracts (preconditions/postconditions/assertions - which I think are potentially extremely interesting for research computing), Co-routines, Concepts, Ranges, and Modules.

Modules are probably the biggest change to the language.  Ever since C, the approach that’s been taken for modularization of C/C++ code is C-preprocessor style include statements.  These are hard to reason about and slow/difficult/repetitive to compile, because macros, etc defined earlier in your file - er, ‘translation unit’ - can modify the interpretation of what you’re including.  You can also easily find yourself in a twisted mess of circular imports.

With modules (a good quick introduction is [here](https://vector-of-bool.github.io/2019/03/10/modules-1.html)), there are import and export statements setting explicit boundaries around modules and, frankly, improving clarity - it’s now much easier to understand what the interface is to a collection of code.

In the first paper, Takahashi *et al.* describe the partial rewrite of CERN’s ROOT to modules.  For ROOT, which is (a) a huge codebase and (b) is often used in the context of a C++ interpreter/JIT system, Cling, the problem modules solve is particularly urgent.  This work is completed by the second paper by Vassilev *et al.*  They discuss both the logistics of moving a large code base to modules, and the substantial compilation/JIT performance improvements they see.

(PS, congratulations to GSOC student Arpitha Raghunandan who apparently helped with the module indexing work of the second paper).

