---
layout: post
title: What Google teaches new managers, and why
date: 2020-05-22
issue_number: 25
original_url: https://www.researchcomputingteams.org/newsletter_issues/0025
tags: ['becoming_a_manager,other']
priority: 3
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD041 -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD049 -->

[Google Spent Years Studying Effective Bosses. Now They Teach New Managers These 6 Things](https://www.inc.com/michael-schneider/analysis-10000-reports-told-google-to-train-new-managers-6-areas.html) - Michael Schneider, Inc<br/>
[Google’s New Manager Training](https://rework.withgoogle.com/guides/managers-develop-and-support-managers/steps/review-googles-new-manager-training/) - re:Work, Google<br/>
[Effective Management for New Managers](https://angelariggs.github.io/articles/effective-management) - Angela Riggs<br/>

I’ve written about Google’s Project Oxygen before in this newsletter — an effort that launched half-expecting to find that technical management didn’t matter ended up discovering that it very much did.  Project Oxygen was the effort to better understand which management behaviours improved team performance, and their re:Work effort is their (largely public) management training material

The Inc. article describes their new-manager training effort. Training focusses on six areas:

1. Growth mindset (people can develop new skills) and values
2. Emotional intelligence (paying attention to one’s and other’s emotions)
3. The uncomfortable transition from individual contributor to manager
4. Coaching teammates to improve
5. Giving effective feedback, and
6. Decision making.

The [training material](https://rework.withgoogle.com/guides/managers-develop-and-support-managers/steps/review-googles-new-manager-training/) is worth going through. Sections 1-3 likely really require a facilitator, but the material on 4-6 is less hands-on and pretty solid.

None of the material is very unique, because the skills it takes to manage well aren’t specific to one company.  Rigg’s series of articles covers much of the same ideas in blog-post form, but the workbook and slides are very nice for a classroom session.

The need for frequent, prompt, and behaviour-focussed feedback is nicely called out in both sets of materials.  Google’s Situation-Behaviour-Impact model (“At this afternoon’s staff meeting, you arrived 15 minutes late, which broke the flow of Bob’s presentation and require extra time while we caught you up”) is very similar to seen elsewhere but well described.  Rigg’s (correctly, I think) goes farther and integrates requesting change into the model.

Would re:Work or similar training courses being offered be something of interest to you, for yourself or people in your organization who are on their way to becoming new managers?  Have you seen this done elsewhere?  One of our readers has had training done for their team, but I think most of us are mostly left to our own devices.
