---
layout: post
title: Templates for Writing a Better Board Report! - Dolph Ward Goldenburg
date: 2021-02-12
original_url: https://www.researchcomputingteams.org/newsletter_issues/0061
tags: ['working_with_decision_makers', 'working_with_stakeholders']
priority: 1
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD041 -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD049 -->

[Templates for Writing a Better Board Report!](https://successfulnonprofits.com/boardreport/) - Dolph Ward Goldenburg

Research computing leadership can and should learn a lot from nonprofit leadership.  Research computing grant-writing is are more like writing for nonprofit grants than it is for research grants (remind me to write this blog post some day).  Managing open-source contributions is exactly managing volunteers.  Stakeholder management, community outreach… there’s a lot of overlap.

This particular blog post won’t be relevant to all research computing managers. Some of us have mangers who are themselves involved in research computing, who because of their role keep track of the details of our work.  Say, you’re a Manager, Research Software Development and you report to a Director, Research Computing - this article might not be relevant to you.

But if you are the technical lead of a project, and you report to a Scientific Advisory Board, either as their direct report or as an important source of stakeholder input.  Then it can be very useful to think of that relationship as you heading a nonprofit and reporting to a board, and a lot of advice about keeping that relationship healthy and useful both ways carries over very nicely from nonprofit leadership.

If you’re meeting with your SAB monthly or quarterly, it can be hard to pull your head up out of the weeds and think about things they care about.  If you talk too much about technical or team management details, at best you’ll bore them, and at worst they’ll decide to start directing you on those topics.  (And why wouldn’t they?  You’re the one bringing it up to them!)

Goldenburg has a board report template (in slides or a document) for like a two page regular report

- Mission Moment - A story from the past period about how the work is advancing the project’s mission;
- Dashboard metrics (remember from [#58](https://newsletter.researchcomputingteams.org/archive/410ef54d-ef8a-41e0-bf77-b9c06eb612b0), metrics don’t have to be hard - just start counting things you care about; another good nonprofit lesson)
- Greatest successes and challenges
- Looking ahead - topic of the month
- Opportunities for engagement

The first topic and the last two in particular are genius - it primes the board members to be focussed on the big picture, and it lets you get feedback in the areas that you really care about getting input from them.
