---
layout: post
title: Engineering Productivity Can Be Measured - Just Not How You'd Expect - Antoine Boulanger, OKAY
date: 2021-02-19
issue_number: 62
original_url: https://www.researchcomputingteams.org/newsletter_issues/0062
tags: ['managing_a_team,other', 'managing_your_career,productivity']
priority: 3
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD041 -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD049 -->

[Engineering Productivity Can Be Measured - Just Not How You'd Expect](https://www.okayhq.com/blog/engineering-productivity-can-be-measured) - Antoine Boulanger, OKAY

A while ago we had a flurry of “measuring developer productivity” articles, mainly pointing out that the idea was a bit misguided.

There’s a management book, “[How to Measure Anything](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/444653.How_to_Measure_Anything)”, which I think of as “Error Bars for Business Types”.  Fine book as far as that goes; not really for us as an audience.  But one point that book made stuck with me - as managers, the purpose of a measurement we make is to inform a decision, and thus action.  We don’t measure “just to keep an eye” on something.

I think when research computing managers daydream and imagine measuring team member productivity, the tendency is to picture some dashboard we can look at every so often while we’re doing our own stuff, and only switch into manager mode and intervene when the dashboard flips from green to yellow.  “Hey, Jason, it seems like there’s some kind of problem.  Tell me about it”.   It’s a lovely thought; the only problem is that it’s completely divorced from reality. We’re managing a team in research computing, where we have to constantly talk and work with people - team members, stakeholders - to understand what’s going on, find out what’s needed, remove blockers, and to help everyone stay pointed in the same direction.

For individuals, there’s nothing much more you can do than routinely set goals with team members, and then together assess whether or not those goals were reached, why, and what can be done differently in the future.  It’s labour intensive and requires subjective judgement and that’s about all there is to it.

As Boulanger points out, however, there absolutely are useful productivity measures we can keep track of and act on - at the team level.  The idea is to track things that are slowing the team down - is tooling inadequate?  Are processes leaving tickets or code review requests sitting idle for too long?  Are people’s days sliced up into too many chunks with meetings? - and do something about it as a manager.

Boulanger suggests that we:

- Look at our team's calendars - quantify how sliced up their time is, look at what meetings can be streamlined/made asynchronous
- Check our team's ticket tracking logs - are their tickets sitting for long swaths of time?  Why?
- Survey our team - are they happy with tooling?  Are they happy with on-call duties, if any?  What changes could be made to make them happier and more productive?

And turn these questions into a modest number of metrics to focus on and improve.  Of course, this flips the script on what some managers in tech imagine the purpose of the productivity metrics are for.  Rather than turning them on the team members (“You’re only scoring an 18.3 on the productivity meter!  Productivize more!”) it means there’s work for *the manager* to do.  Such is the reality of our job.
