---
layout: post
title: Pull Requests vs (are?) Pair Programming
date: 2021-04-09
<<<<<<< HEAD
<<<<<<< HEAD
issue_number: 69
=======
>>>>>>> 0a34fe0... First go at item pages
=======
issue_number: 69
>>>>>>> c1d069a... First pass at category pages
original_url: https://www.researchcomputingteams.org/newsletter_issues/0069
tags: ['technical_leadership', 'software_development', 'code_reviews']
priority: 3
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD041 -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD049 -->

[Those pesky pull request reviews](https://jessitron.com/2021/03/27/those-pesky-pull-request-reviews/) - Jessica Joy Kerr<br/>
[Can pair programming replace code review?](https://jhall.io/archive/2021/04/05/can-pair-programming-replace-code-review/) - Jonathan Hall

Kerr’s blog post in late March kicked off a series of posts in the software-dev blogosphere on whether we should still be doing pull reviews.  There’s too many posts to list here, but these two by RCT roundup regulars, cover much of the range of views.

Kerr’s pretty firmly on team get-rid-of-’em.  My summary of her argument: There’s a reason why no one likes getting or giving pull request reviews.  They are hard to do (because you have to load all the context of the person making the change into your head, then review the code, then come up with the review), can be unpleasant to get.  They’re inspired by the open-source github pull request model, taking untrusted code from strangers on the internet, where it works well and is necessary, but is that *really* a helpful model for a software development team?  Let’s get rid of PRs and do pair programming instead - it provides the same key functionality (knowledge dissemination to another team member and second person’s overview of the code) without the low-trust structure.  Quoting her pull-quote:

> **Pull requests are an improvement on working alone. But not on working together.**

Hall is on team keep-’em; while he likes pair review for mentoring and for encouraging deep understanding of the code by another team member, the higher-quality of code review (by someone coming to it in the cold light of day) and the higher-quality of written documentation in the PR (meaning everyone, not just the pair involved, can see the reasoning behind the change).

One thing I’ve really enjoyed about this conversation has been a lot of thoughtful discussion (including by these two authors) about the why's of code review.  Myself, I’ve been pretty influenced by Chelsea Troy’s articles about [PRs as asynchronous pair programming](https://chelseatroy.com/2019/12/18/reviewing-pull-requests/), and if we’re going to increasingly have distributed flexible teams - even more so if we’re going to have community research software accepting external contributions - I think we’re going to have to have PRs.  That doesn’t rule out synchronous pair programming, though; I think it compliments it.