---
layout: post
title: Handing Vents and Making 11s Productive
date: 2021-06-18
<<<<<<< HEAD
<<<<<<< HEAD
issue_number: 79
=======
>>>>>>> 0a34fe0... First go at item pages
=======
issue_number: 79
>>>>>>> c1d069a... First pass at category pages
original_url: https://www.researchcomputingteams.org/newsletter_issues/0079
tags: ['one_on_ones', 'managing_individuals', 'becoming_a_manager']
priority: 3
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD041 -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD049 -->

[When a 1:1 turns into a vent session](https://nomadfornow.com/blog/when-1:1-turns-into-vent-session/) - Yihwan Kim<br/>
[One-on-one 101](https://clickety.app/blog/one-on-one_101/) - Tiffany Longworth, Clickety<br/>
[The Update, The Vent, and The Disaster](https://randsinrepose.com/archives/the-update-the-vent-and-the-disaster/) - Michael Lopp

A couple good articles on one-on-ones from a a couple of weeks ago.

In the first, Kim offers five pieces of advice around vents.  In particular, vents aren’t about problem solving, they’re about letting something out - and that something has been festering for a while.  So Kim’s advice is:

- Don’t rationalize, and definitely don’t interrupt
- Don’t assume — ask
- Don’t take a stance (you’re only hearing one side of things), but don’t be afraid to have opinions
- Try to end on a positive note
- See if you need to follow-up

In particular sometimes just letting something out is enough - but sometimes it’s raising something that needs to be addressed in future discussions.

In Longworth’s article, she talks about her formula for one-on-ones:

- Her first question is always “What’s the most important thing we talk about today?”
- After having the team member lead the discussion for a while, she addresses follow ups from previous meetings/things that came up this week.
- Asks about the team member’s wins for week, and worries
- Gives any org updates - this can be really tricky to do in one-on-ones and in my opinion is best handled in staff meetings
- Any time at the end gets filled with Weird Manager Questions; she asks if she can ask a weird manager question and then asks one of these:
    - Think about how you spend your time at work. Divide this sticky note/whiteboard square/drawing doc into the different things you do. Are these the right amounts of time you should/want to be spending on each of these? What would an ideal distribution of your time look like?”
    - “What ways can we show you we appreciate what you do?”
    - “Using [**Paloma Medina’s BICEPS framework**](https://www.palomamedina.com/biceps), how are you doing across each of your core needs?” I like to use a scale model and track this over time. You can use something like “On a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 is ‘I feel awful’ and 5 is ‘happy as a clam,’ where are you on Belonging?” or something more tactile like “Here’s an empty battery outline - how ‘full’ or ‘empty’ are you feeling on Predictability?”


The last article is an old one but includes elements of both Kim and Longworth’s articles.  In particular, Lopp considers a one-on-one that is just “an update” to be a bit of a miss, and shares his own approach for dealing with those - bringing up three particular points, doing a mini performance review on some specific area, or taking the time to get input on some fire *he*'s fighting.    For the vent or the disaster Lopp gives similar advice to Kim - and suggests that one purpose of one-on-ones is to provide an environment where some of those minor dissatisfactions can be surfaced before they become vents or disasters.
