---
layout: post
title: The 3 Ways Leaders Can Create Feedback Culture At Work - LifeLabs
date: 2022-03-05
<<<<<<< HEAD
<<<<<<< HEAD
issue_number: 112
=======
>>>>>>> 0a34fe0... First go at item pages
=======
issue_number: 112
>>>>>>> c1d069a... First pass at category pages
original_url: https://www.researchcomputingteams.org/newsletter_issues/0112
tags: ['feedback', 'managing_teams']
priority: 3
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD041 -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD049 -->

[The 3 Ways Leaders Can Create Feedback Culture At Work](https://home.lifelabslearning.com/download-feedback-culture-tool) - LifeLabs

LifeLabs has a very short illustrated ebook to view or download - there’s a button to give your email address but you don’t need to do so to look at or download the PDF.  (As a general rule I don’t recommend even pretty good resources that end up with you on a mailing list)

This ebook talks about the benefits of leading with feedback, and modelling the desired behaviour.  The key piece, on structuring your feedback, will give familiar advice to longtime readers; it’s very similar to [manager-tools](https://home.lifelabslearning.com/download-feedback-culture-tool) or [Lara Hogan’s](https://larahogan.me/blog/feedback-equation/) approach - asking if you can give some feedback, noting the behaviour, noting the impact, and ending with an ask for a change (if negative feedback).  This model also has a preamble, “I wanted to share X because I think it will help us Y”.

It’s always good to review the basics, and giving good and *frequent* feedback is one of the most important things we can do as managers or leads.  Worth looking at if you’ve felt your feedback needs some brushing up.

In general LifeLabs Learning seems to do pretty good work in the teaching-people-to-manage space.  At some point I should give a quick review of their book, [The Leader Lab](https://lifelabslearning.com/the-leader-lab/).  Their writing style is… very different than my preferred nonfiction writing style, and I expect others in research would likely have a similar first reaction.  But once I get past that the information there is solid, and the basic ideas are organized into different components than I’ve seen before.  It’s genuinely useful to see concepts presented in novel ways.  They also focus on very specific behaviours which makes putting their lessons into practice easier.