---
layout: post
title: Minto Pyramid - Adam Amran, Untools
date: 2022-03-19
<<<<<<< HEAD
<<<<<<< HEAD
issue_number: 114
=======
>>>>>>> 0a34fe0... First go at item pages
=======
issue_number: 114
>>>>>>> c1d069a... First pass at category pages
original_url: https://www.researchcomputingteams.org/newsletter_issues/0114
tags: ['working_with_decision_makers', 'managing_up', 'working_with_stakeholders', 'communications_tools']
priority: 1
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD041 -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD049 -->

[Minto Pyramid](https://untools.co/minto-pyramid) - Adam Amran, Untools

Amran gives a very clear formula here for emails that you also see in advice
for briefing boards (or in our case, *e.g*., scientific advisory committee.).
Start with a one-sentence paragraph of the conclusion (or the ask); then a
listing of the key arguments; then the supporting details.  I’d add that the
subject line should reflect the conclusion/ask.

I’ve been thinking a lot about this recently.  I’m generally ok about writing
to-the-point, skimmable emails.  But that skill may have atrophied a bit
recently.  In my previous job, I didn’t send a lot of emails (we used slack
internally mostly).  When I did send them, as a manager and as a big fish in
a small pond, I… could kind of assume my emails would be carefully read.  In
retrospect I kind of got lazy and leaned on that, which I now feel sheepish
about.

I’m in now an individual contributor in a *very* email-heavy organization.
I can see very clearly the effects of getting lazy about sending bottom-line-up-front
emails.  I’ve tried to communicate some points via email to some very busy
account managers in the past couple weeks, and some of the points just did
not get across.  So it’s time to up my game again.

Not every email lends itself to this formula, of course, but sticking to
bottom-line-up-front is a good general principle.
