---
layout: post
title: The Uninspiring Manager - Matt Schellhas
date: 2022-03-19
<<<<<<< HEAD
<<<<<<< HEAD
issue_number: 114
=======
>>>>>>> 0a34fe0... First go at item pages
=======
issue_number: 114
>>>>>>> c1d069a... First pass at category pages
original_url: https://www.researchcomputingteams.org/newsletter_issues/0114
tags: ['becoming_a_manager']
priority: 3
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD041 -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD049 -->

[The Uninspiring Manager](https://matt-schellhas.medium.com/the-uninspiring-manager-e2e2e752ab24) - Matt Schellhas

Too much of what I imagined an excellent manager should be early
in my career (not having really seen any) was focussed on personal
characteristics.  Such leaders should be engaging, people-persons…
and inspiring.

It’s not that any of those things is bad, of course.  Those are all
traits and behaviours that can be put to good use as a manager or
lead!  But so can the default behaviours of quiet, attentive,
carefully-thinks-before-speaking introverts.  Or of
keep-ticking-things-off-the-list achievers.  Or of caring, emotionally
intuitive, confidantes.  Each has default behaviours that are
extremely helpful in the right circumstance, and are downright
liabilities in others.

Schellhas makes the case against needing to be inspiring to be a
good manager.  In his view, people mostly already *want* to do a
good job, and what they need to accomplish that is: information;
skill; and willpower.

Inspiration doesn’t help at all with the first two, and only
temporarily for the third.  A better use of energy than temporarily
*boosting* willpower with some rah rah stuff, he says, would be to
put effort into fixing willpower-*sapping* features of the job.
Fixing flaky CI systems that make writing tests seem useless, or
removing unnecessary reporting.

One thing Schellhas doesn’t call out that I’ll add - being able to
communicate a clear vision for the team *is*, in my estimation, a
requirement of the job.  People need to know what they are aiming
for, and how their work fits into that.  And that vision might even
be inspiring!  But that inspiration best comes from the work and
goals themselves, not from some charismatic leader.
