---
layout: post
title: Research Software Capability in Australia - Michelle Barker and Markus Buchhorn
date: 2022-03-19
original_url: https://www.researchcomputingteams.org/newsletter_issues/0114
tags: ['software_development', 'advocacy_resources']
priority: 3
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD041 -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD049 -->

[Survey reveals 6000+ people develop and maintain vital research software for Australian research](https://ardc.edu.au/news/survey-reveals-6000-people-develop-and-maintain-vital-research-software-for-australian-research/) - Jo Savill*,* Australian Research Data Commons (ARDC)<br>
[Research Software Capability in Australia](https://zenodo.org/record/6335998#.YjFKrC8r2eQ) - Michelle Barker and Markus Buchhorn

Interesting results from a late-2021 ARDC survey on research software capability, of 70 managers of Australian research computing and data groups.  Results were scaled to try to give an estimate of all-of-Australia numbers.

The article by Savill gives an overview, and the full report by Barker and
Buchhorn is interesting reading.   Some key findings taken from the article
and the report:

- About 6,000 people (and about 2,500 FTEs) working in roles that provide software development.
- That’s about 1 FTE worth of software developer (broadly defined) effort per 40 researchers.
- 46% of respondents perceived that the skills of their research software capability they manage were adequate.
- 78% of respondents answered “yes” or “maybe” to a question on whether these personnel had access to mechanisms to improve their skills.  (LJD: That’s not super encouraging.  Free Coursera courses is *a* mechanism to improve skills…)
- 80 different job titles were listed as used for these staff.  (LJD: 80!!!!)
- Only 33% of these staff have permanent employment.
- 56% of researchers did not feel there was adequate research software capability in their area - rising to 60% of those with a focus on an entire discipline and 75% for those with a whole-of-University focus.  (LJD: These numbers are consistent with sub-disciplines that are heavy software users and probably contributors disproportionately returning surveys, which I think is what I’d expect.)

These numbers - and the problems they suggest - seem plausible to me for Canada, as well.  The reliance on unfunded and part-time software development and maintenance is a real issue, as is the lack of any kind of coherent career track (80 job titles!!).  The good news is that 43% of respondents had plans to recruit more people into those roles over the next 1-3 years.

Do these proportions seem about right in your neck of the woods (be that
geography or discipline?). Do things look like they’re getting better or
worse?